E11 沉迷谐音梗的爱丽丝：A Long Tale? No, a Long Tail!
2025.10.14
王芃芃
难度：CSE7
课程导读

在上节课中，我们了解到在渡渡鸟的指挥下，爱丽丝和动物们跑了一场莫名其妙的“caucus-race”。虽然到比赛结束大家也没搞明白这场比赛到底是怎么个玩法，不过好歹身上倒是晾干了。而等每位选手都品尝完自己的奖品后，大家又一次席地而坐，求老鼠再讲点好玩的。那老鼠会讲点什么呢？一起进入今天的课程内容。

英文原文

“You promised to tell me your history, you know,” said Alice, “and why it is you hate—C and D,” she added in a whisper, half afraid that it would be offended again.

“Mine is a long and a sad tale!” said the Mouse, turning to Alice, and sighing.

“It is a long tail, certainly,” said Alice, looking down with wonder at the Mouse's tail; “but why do you call it sad?” And she kept on puzzling about it while the Mouse was speaking, so that her idea of the tale was something like this:

【拓展】

concrete poetry 具象诗

1. 含义：指一种跨越文学和艺术领域的诗歌体裁，最大的特点为“形式即内容”，诗歌文本的排列方式能直接呼应内容主题。

2. 代表作：
· 具象诗最早可以追溯到公元前二三世纪的希腊；
· 19世纪英语世界里最著名的代表作就是卡罗尔这首关于老鼠身世的小诗；
· 20世纪，具象诗集大成者之一是法国著名诗人阿波利奈尔，以他的反战诗《被杀害的和平鸽》为代表，其文字排版像一只中弹流血的和平鸽，实现了从内容和视觉上的双重强烈冲击，达成了突破语言边界、向全人类呼吁和平的效果。

         “Fury said to a
         mouse, That he
        met in the
       house,
     ‘Let us
      both go to
       law: I will
        prosecute
         you.—Come,
           I’ll take no
           denial; We
          must have a
        trial: For
      really this
     morning I’ve
    nothing
    to do.’
      Said the
      mouse to the
       cur, ‘Such
        a trial,
         dear sir,
            With
          no jury
        or judge,
       would be
      wasting
      our
      breath.’
        ‘I’ll be
        judge, I’ll
         be jury,’
             Said
         cunning
          old Fury:
          ‘I’ll
          try the
            whole
            cause,
              and
           condemn
           you
          to
           death.’”

屋里老弗利，
偶遇鼠小弟，
赶忙厉声道：
“咱俩上法庭，
我把你来告——
别想临阵逃；
说告我就告：
只因我今早，
实在太无聊。”

鼠小弟劝狗，
婆心又苦口：
“陪审和法官，
统统把门关，
此番口舌战，
怕是终枉然。”

“法官由我当，
陪审我也干。”
老狗性狡诈，
诡计最多端。
“断案我包圆，
保你下九泉！”

“You are not attending!” said the Mouse to Alice, severely. “What are you thinking of?”

“I beg your pardon,” said Alice very humbly: “you had got to the fifth bend, I think?”

请同学们数一数配图诗歌中有多少道弯：

“I had not!” cried the Mouse, sharply and very angrily.

“A knot!” said Alice, always ready to make herself useful, and looking anxiously about her. “Oh, do let me help to undo it!”

“I shall do nothing of the sort,” said the Mouse, getting up and walking away. “You insult me by talking such nonsense!”

【拓展】

Why, with so evident a design of offending and insulting me, you chose to tell me that you liked me against your will, against your reason, and even against your character?

为什么你明明白白存心要触犯我，侮辱我，偏偏要说你喜欢我，违背了你自己的意志，违背了你自己的理性，甚至违背了你自己的性格？
——《傲慢与偏见》（台词节选）

“I didn't mean it!” pleaded poor Alice. “But you're so easily offended, you know!”

The Mouse only growled in reply.

“Please come back, and finish your story!” Alice called after it; and the others all joined in chorus, “Yes, please do!” but the Mouse only shook its head impatiently, and walked a little quicker.

【拓展】

Anticlimax 反高潮手法

指故事从充满张力的顶点瞬间跌落到平淡谷底的叙事，极具讽刺效果。主要作用为：

1. 通过强烈的落差感提供笑点
2. 让故事拥有一份不受传统叙事节奏束缚的叛逆色彩

“What a pity it wouldn't stay!” sighed the Lory, as soon as it was quite out of sight; and an old crab took the opportunity of saying to her daughter, “Ah, my dear! Let this be a lesson to you never to lose your temper!” “Hold your tongue, ma!” said the young crab, a little snappishly. “You're enough to try the patience of an oyster!”

“I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do!” said Alice aloud, addressing nobody in particular. “She'd soon fetch it back!”

“And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask the question” said the Lory.

Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her pet. “Dinah's our cat. And she's such a capital one for catching mice you can't think! And oh, I wish you could see her after the birds! Why, she'll eat a little bird as soon as look at it!”

This speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party. Some of the birds hurried off at once: one old magpie began wrapping itself up very carefully, remarking, “I really must be getting home; the night air doesn't suit my throat!” and a canary called out in a trembling voice to its children, “Come away, my dears! It's high time you were all in bed!” On various pretexts they all moved off, and Alice was soon left alone.

“I wish I hadn't mentioned Dinah!” she said to herself in a melancholy tone. “Nobody seems to like her, down here, and I'm sure she's the best cat in the world! Oh, my dear Dinah! I wonder if I shall ever see you any more!” And here poor Alice began to cry again, for she felt very lonely and low-spirited. In a little while, however, she again heard a little pattering of footsteps in the distance, and she looked up eagerly, half hoping that the Mouse had changed his mind and was coming back to finish his story.

【文化卡片】

生词好句

1.C and D
此处的“C and D”是“cats and dogs”的省略说法。

2.attend
英 [əˈtend]	美 [əˈtend]
（本文）v. 注意，专心
拓展:
词义辨析：attend vs. pay attention
和"pay attention"相比，"attend"要更为正式。
Bill has not been attending in class.
比尔上课的时候老是不专心听讲。

3.sharply
英 [ˈʃɑːpli]	美 [ˈʃɑːrpli]
adv. 尖厉地

4.angrily
英 [ˈæŋgrɪli]	美 [ˈæŋgrɪli]
adv. 生气地

5.knot
英 [nɒt]	美 [nɑːt]
n. 结

6.always ready to make oneself useful
乐于助人

7.insult
英 [ˈɪnsʌlt]	美 [ˈɪnsʌlt]
v. 侮辱

8.crab
英 [kræb]	美 [kræb]
n. （本文）螃蟹；爱发牢骚、爱抱怨的人；v. 抱怨
拓展:
You're making the problem worse by crabbing about it!
你的抱怨只会让事情变得更麻烦！

9.lose one's temper
发脾气

10.snappishly
英 [ˈsnæpɪʃli]	美 [ˈsnæpɪʃli]
adv. 不耐烦地

11.oyster
英 [ˈɔɪstə]	美 [ˈɔɪstər]
n. （本文）牡蛎；不轻易开口说话、沉默寡言、守口如瓶的人

12.fetch somebody
（本文）把猎物叼回来；把某人叫来

13.venture to do something
小心谨慎地去做（大概会有点不祥的）事
拓展:
venture to suggest that he might have made a mistake 鼓起勇气来提醒他做错了

14.a remarkable sensation
一场相当大的骚动
拓展:
sensation n. 轰动，哗然，骚乱

15.pretext
英 [ˈpriːtekst]	美 [ˈpriːtekst]
n. 借口，托辞
拓展:
词义辨析：pretext vs. excuse
pretext和excuse意思相近，但pretext更强调"昧着良心"的前提。
He didn't attend the meeting on the pretext of having a fever.
他为了不开会而假装发烧。
