E20 进化论在仙境：鱼蛙男仆、海星婴儿，物种规则全乱套？
2025.12.16
王芃芃
难度：CSE6
课程导读

上节课中，爱丽丝在林间小屋外观察时，无意间看到鱼男仆向蛙男仆宣读王后的懿旨：王后邀请公爵夫人去打槌球。随后，爱丽丝为了进入屋内，与蛙男仆沟通了许久却徒劳无功，好在最终还是设法进去。然而，门后的第一个房间竟是烟雾弥漫、胡椒刺鼻的大厨房，里面除了厨子，还有怀抱婴儿的公爵夫人，以及在炉前咧嘴笑着的大猫。从古怪动物到莫名其妙的人——爱丽丝想在仙境里好好聊个天，怎么就这么难？接下来我们看看她这次的对话又会如何展开。

英文原文

"Please would you tell me," said Alice, a little timidly, for she was not quite sure whether it was good manners for her to speak first, "why your cat grins like that?”
"It's a Cheshire cat," said the Duchess, "and that's why. Pig!"
She said the last word with such sudden violence that Alice quite jumped; but she saw in another moment that it was addressed to the baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and went on again:

"I didn't know that Cheshire cats always grinned; in fact, I didn't know that cats could grin."
"They all can," said the Duchess; "and most of 'em do."

"I don't know of any that do," Alice said very politely, feeling quite pleased to have got into a conversation.
"You don't know much," said the Duchess; "and that's a fact."

Alice did not at all like the tone of this remark and thought it would be as well to introduce some other subject of conversation. While she was trying to fix on one, the cook took the caldron of soup off the fire, and at once set to work throwing everything within her reach at the Duchess and the baby—the fire-irons came first; then followed a shower of saucepans, plates and dishes. The Duchess took no notice of them, even when they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already, that it was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.

"Oh Please mind what you're doing!" cried Alice, jumping up and down in an agony of terror. "Oh, there goes his precious nose!" as an unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and very nearly carried it off.

"If everybody minded their own business," said the Duchess in a hoarse growl, "the world would go round a deal faster than it does."

"Which would not be an advantage," said Alice, who felt very glad to get an opportunity of showing off a little of her knowledge. "Just think of what work it would make with the day and night! You see the earth takes twenty-four hours to turn round on its axis—"

"Talking of axes," said the Duchess, "chop off her head!" Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant to take the hint; but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and seemed not to be listening, so she went on again: "Twenty-four hours, I think; or is it twelve? I—"

"Oh, don't bother me," said the Duchess; "I never could abide figures." And with that she began nursing her child again, singing a sort of lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent shake at the end of every line:

"Speak roughly to your little boy,
And beat him when he sneezes;
He only does it to annoy,
Because he knows it teases.”
CHORUS
(in which the cook and the baby joined):
"Wow! wow! wow!"

对小男孩就得说话凶点，
打喷嚏时绝对不能手软；
他这么干就为了讨人厌，
因为他知道能把你惹烦。
合唱：
（厨子和婴儿都加入进来）
“哇！哇！哇！”

While the Duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept tossing the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing howled so, that Alice could hardly hear the words:

"I speak severely to my boy,
I beat him when he sneezes;
For he can thoroughly enjoy
The pepper when he pleases!”
CHORUS
"Wow! wow! wow!"

我对自家男孩不留情面，
打喷嚏我揍他皮开肉绽；
胡椒看似刺激，实则不然，
开心的时候他吸个没完！
合唱：
“哇！哇！哇！”

【拓展】

原诗：
Speak gently to the little child!
Its love be sure to gain;
Teach it in accents soft and mild;
It may not long remain.
对小孩子需要轻声细语，
才能获得ta的充盈爱意；
教导之时尽量春风化雨；
毕竟童年时光白驹过隙。

Speak gently to the young, for they
Will have enough to bear;
Pass through this life as best they may,
'Tis full of anxious care!
对年轻人也要循循善诱，
ta们的人生将充满艰险；
唯有尽己所能只身闯荡，
走过忧心忡忡的人世间！

原诗作者尚无定论，或是英国的G. W. Langford，或是美国的David Bates。由于没有明确讽刺对象，且原作不太出名，这种模仿不算parody（戏仿），而是burlesque（诙谐模仿）。

"Here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like!" said the Duchess to Alice, flinging the baby at her as she spoke. "I must go and get ready to play croquet with the Queen," and she hurried out of the room. The cook threw a fryingpan after her as she went, but it just missed her.

Alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer-shaped little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all directions, "just like a starfish," thought Alice. The poor little thing was snorting like a steam engine when she caught it, and kept doubling itself up and straightening itself out again, so that altogether, for the first minute or two, it was as much as she could do to hold it.

【拓展】

达尔文的《物种起源》在1859年发表，就在《爱丽丝梦游仙境》出版的几年前。

【文化卡片】

生词好句

1.Cheshire cat
柴郡猫
拓展:
grin like a Cheshire cat 笑得跟柴郡猫一样，形容笑得合不拢嘴（这一俗语来源有两种主流说法：(1) 与"住"有关。在英格兰柴郡（Cheshire），过去许多旅馆的招牌上都画着咧嘴笑的狮子，这是当地的标志，所以"Cheshire cat"可能指的就是这些笑面狮。(2) 与"食"有关。柴郡特产的Cheshire cheese常被做成咧着嘴笑的猫的形状，因此该俗语也可能源于这些奶酪的外形。）

2.pig
英 [pɪɡ]	美 [pɪɡ]
n. 猪；（本文）讨厌的、肮脏的、贪婪的、愚蠢的人

3.it would be as well to do something
最好还是......
拓展:
It would be as well to call and say we might be late.
最好还是打个电话告诉人家一声我们可能会晚点到。

4.introduce
英 [ɪntrəˈdjuːs]	美 [ɪntrəˈduːs]
v. 引入（to present something for discussion）

5.subject of conversation
聊天话题

6.fix on
选定、决定

7.fire-irons
火炉用具（如拨火棍、火钳、火铲等）

8.a shower of
像密集的雨点一样落下来（形容短暂、大量、突然、挡也挡不住）
拓展:
a shower of applause 一阵掌声雷动a shower of abuse 一通劈头盖脸的大骂

9.saucepan
英 [ˈsɔːspæn]	美 [ˈsɔːspæn]
n. 深平底锅；煮锅

10.plates and dishes
盘子
拓展:
辨析：plates and dishes
区别：(1) 形状不同：plate通常是圆的，而dish可以是各种形状，比如长方形的烤盘叫baking dish；(2) 用途不同：plate是每人面前的小盘子，dish是上菜用、放在桌中间的大盘子。

11.an agony of terror
极度恐惧
拓展:
agony n. 痛苦；(本文) 感情的爆发
an agony of joy 狂喜

12.there goes...
飞出去；（本文）完蛋了

13.carry something off / carry off something
削掉（remove）

14.mind somebody's own business
管好自己就行（别多管闲事）

15.hoarse growl
嘶哑的怒吼

16.a deal
很多（a lot）

17.work
英 [wɜːk]	美 [wɜːrk]
n.（本文）影响
拓展:
The medicine has done its work.
吃下的药产生作用了。

18.axis
英 [ˈæksɪs]	美 [ˈæksɪs]
n. 轴；地轴

19.take the hint
明白并执行（understand and act on what someone is implying or suggesting）

20.abide
英 [əˈbaɪd]	美 [əˈbaɪd]
v. 容忍
拓展:
常用否定形式"cannot abide"（忍不了），指太讨厌了某人，一秒都不想跟ta多待（to dislike somebody or something so much that you hate having to be with or deal with them）
I cannot abide hypocrites.
我最受不了的就是言行不一的伪君子。

21.lullaby
英 [ˈlʌləbaɪ]	美 [ˈlʌləbaɪ]
n. 摇篮曲

22.verse
英 [vɜːrs]	美 [vɜːrs]
n. 歌曲的段落

23.toss
英 [tɒs]	美 [tɒs]
v. 漫不经心地抛或扔
拓展:
toss the ball 传球toss the coin 扔硬币看正反

24.fling
英 [flɪŋ]	美 [flɪŋ]
v.（用力地）抛、掷、扔（to throw something somewhere using a lot of force）

25.throw something after somebody
在某人身后朝ta扔东西

26.fryingpan
英 [ˈfraɪɪŋpæn]	美 [ˈfraɪɪŋpæn]
n. 煎锅

27.snort
英 [snɔːrt]	美 [snɔːrt]
v. 哼哼；机器发出喷气的声音

28.steam engine
蒸汽机

29.double up
弓起身子

30.straighten out
伸展开来

31.it was as much as one could do to do something
某人当时顶多只能做到这个程度了
拓展:
It was as much as I could do to not cry out loud.
我顶多只能控制自己别哭出声。