E27 拿火烈鸟当球槌：王后真的在打球赛吗？
2026.02.03
王芃芃
难度：CSE6
课程导读

上节课中，爱丽丝首次与以暴虐著称的红桃王后正面接触，看似声势骇人的王后，实则并非不可对抗。爱丽丝不仅未受惩罚，反而被邀请参加槌球比赛。那么，在仙境的槌球赛场上，又将发生哪些荒诞离奇的事情呢？让我们走进今天的故事。

英文原文

"It's—it's a very fine day!" said a timid voice at her side. She was walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.
"Very," said Alice. "where's the Duchess?"
"Hush! Hush!" said the Rabbit in a low, hurried tone. He looked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself upon tip-toe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered, "She's under sentence of execution."

"What for?" said Alice.
"Did you say 'What a pity!'?" the Rabbit asked.
"No, I didn't," said Alice: "I don't think it's at all a pity. I said 'What for?'"
"She boxed the Queen's ears—" the Rabbit began. Alice gave a little scream of laughter. "Oh hush!" the Rabbit whispered in a frightened tone. "The Queen will hear you! You see she came rather late, and the Queen said—"

"Get to your places!" shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder, and people began running about in all directions, tumbling up against each other: however, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the game began.

Alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground in her life: it was all ridges and furrows; the croquet-balls were live hedgehogs, and the mallets live flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves up and to stand on their hands and feet to make the arches.

The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her flamingo: she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough, under her arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she had got its neck nicely straightened out, and was going to give the hedgehog a blow with its head, it would twist itself round and look up into her face, with such a puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out laughing; and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin again, it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled itself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides all this, there was generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers were always getting up and walking off to other parts of the ground, Alice soon came to the conclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed.

The players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrelling all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short time the Queen was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, and shouting "Off with his head!" or "Off with her head!" about once in a minute.

Alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute, "and then," thought she, "what would become of me? They're dreadfully fond of beheading people here: the great wonder is, that there's anyone left alive!”

She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering whether she could get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious appearance in the air: it puzzled her very much at first, but after watching it a minute or two she made it out to be a grin, and she said to herself "It's the Cheshire Cat: now I shall have somebody to talk to."

"How are you getting on?" said the Cat, as soon as there was mouth enough for it to speak with.
Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. "It's no use speaking to it," she thought, "till its ears have come, or at least one of them." In another minute the whole head appeared, and then Alice put down her flamingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very glad she had someone to listen to her. The cat seemed to think that there was enough of it now in sight, and no more of it appeared.

【文化卡片】

生词好句

1.look over one's shoulder
某人回头看

2.raise oneself upon tip-toe
踮起脚来
拓展:
相比stand on tiptoe，raise oneself upon更加生动：一方面它强调踮脚是为了把自己抬高点往上够，另一方面，upon这个词有种努力稳住自己小心别摔倒的笨拙。

3.under sentence of ...
被判处了......的刑罚
拓展:
sentence n. 判决
under... 受制于......
Everything is under control.
一切都尽在掌控
The natural reserves are under threat.
自然保护区正受到威胁。

4.execution
英 [eksɪˈkjuːʃən]	美 [eksɪˈkjuːʃən]
n. 死刑

5.box the Queen's ears
扇王后的耳光

6.give a little scream of laughter
小声尖笑了起来

7.get to one's places
各就各位

8.a voice of thunder
雷鸣般的吼声

9.tumble up against each other
互相撞作一团

10.settle down
（本文）站定

11.ridge
英 [rɪdʒ]	美 [rɪdʒ]
n. 隆起的部分
拓展:
the ridge of a hill 山脊
the ridge of a roof 屋脊
the ridges of a field 田地上的埂

12.furrow
英 [ˈfʌrəʊ]	美 [ˈfɜːroʊ]
n. 沟；槽；皱纹
拓展:
furrows of a plowed field 犁完地留下的犁沟
a deep furrow between one's brows 长在眉间、显得人很凶的竖纹

13.croquet-ball
英 [ˈkrəʊkeɪ]	美 [kroʊˈkeɪ]
n. 槌球

14.hedgehog
英 [ˈhedʒhɒɡ]	美 [ˈhedʒhɑːɡ]
n. 刺猬

15.mallet
英 [ˈmælɪt]	美 [ˈmælɪt]
n. 球槌

16.flamingo
英 [fləˈmɪŋɡəʊ]	美 [fləˈmɪŋɡoʊ]
n. 火烈鸟

17.double themselves up
下腰，把自己对折过来

18.stand on their hands and feet
四肢着地

19.arch
英 [ɑːtʃ]	美 [ɑːrtʃ]
n. 拱门

20.manage
英 [ˈmænɪdʒ]	美 [ˈmænɪdʒ]
v.（本文）控制，驾驭；管理
拓展:
manage a horse 驭马之术
manage a naughty child 管住调皮捣蛋的孩子

21.tuck away
把......藏起来；妥善保管
拓展:
tuck v. 把......塞入，把......藏入
tuck you in 给你盖好被子
The letters are tucked away in a drawer.
信件被妥善保管在抽屉里。
The shop is tucked away down a backstreet.
这家商店隐藏在一条后街。

22.straighten out
（本文）弄直；清理，整顿；解决（问题）；纠正（行为）
拓展:
straighten out one's hair 把头发拉直
I need time to straighten out my finances.
我需要时间好好梳理一下我的财务状况。
straighten out one's problems 纠正某人的行为
His parents sent him to a boarding school to straighten him out.
他父母把他送到寄宿学校，让他改过自新。

23.It is very provoking to find...
某个现象真让人生气
拓展:
provoking adj. 惹人恼火的；令人厌烦的
It is very provoking to find so many people believing that a woman's place is in the home.
居然有这么多人都觉得女性应该回归家庭，真是气死人了。

24.send something to (a place)
发射；投掷；打出去
拓展:
send the ball into the goal 把球一脚射进球门
send a blow to the chin 对准对手的下巴就是一拳

25.all the while
一直

26.in a furious passion
极度愤怒，怒上加怒
拓展:
in a passion 在盛怒之下

27.uneasy
英 [ʌnˈiːzi]	美 [ʌnˈiːzi]
adj.（本文）不安的，忧虑的；不简单的，困难的
拓展:
feel uneasy about... 对......感到不安(worry about...)
Many feel uneasy about the AI boom.
许多人对人工智能的兴盛感到不安。

28.dispute
英 [dɪˈspjuːt]	美 [dɪˈspjuːt]
n.（本文）争吵，吵架（argument）；争论；争议

29.something might / could happen any minute
某事随时可能发生
拓展:
The bus could be here any minute.
公交车马上就要到了。
Things could change any minute.
世事风云变幻，难以预料。

30.appearance
英 [əˈpɪərəns]	美 [əˈpɪrəns]
n. 景象；现象
拓展:
a queer appearance in the sky 天空中出现的怪异景象

31.make something / somebody out to be
把某物或某人描绘成......；通过观察，发现某物或某人到底是......
拓展:
Is she really as bad as she was made out to be?
她真像别人说的那么坏吗？

32.how are you getting on
感觉怎么样（这句表达隐含着关心和共情，表明发问者知道对方正在经历一些很难捱的事）

33.account
英 [əˈkaʊnt]	美 [əˈkaʊnt]
n. 叙述；描述
拓展:
Can you give us an account of what happened?
你能告诉我们发生了什么事吗？
The diaries contained a detailed account of her experience.
她的日记里详细记录了她的经历。
