E28 柴郡猫一个眼神，国王差点破防
2026.02.10
王芃芃
难度：CSE6
课程导读

上节课中，爱丽丝受到王后的邀请，得以参加这场声名远扬的槌球比赛。然而，无论是场地、器具，还是参赛者，都显得荒诞怪异。不远处的红桃王后依旧暴躁如初，凡是稍有不合她心意的人，便会被下令“砍掉脑袋”。就在爱丽丝思索该如何脱身之际，柴郡猫出现在槌球场的上空。看到这张熟悉的面孔，爱丽丝向它倾诉起自己的种种遭遇，让我们进入今天的课程。

英文原文

"I don't think they play at all fairly," Alice began, in rather a complaining tone, "and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can't hear one's self speak— and they don't seem to have any rules in particular; at least, if there are, nobody attends to them—and you've no idea how confusing it is all the things being alive; for instance, there's the arch I've got to go through next walking about at the other end of the ground—and I should have croqueted the Queen's hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it saw mine coming!"

"How do you like the Queen?" said the Cat in a low voice.
"Not at all," said Alice: "she's so extremely—" Just then she noticed that the Queen was close behind her, listening; so she went on, "likely to win, that it's hardly worth while finishing the game."
The Queen smiled and passed on.

"Who are you talking to?" said the King, going up to Alice, and looking at the Cat's head with great curiosity.
"It's a friend of mine—a Cheshire Cat," said Alice; "allow me to introduce it."
"I don't like the look of it at all," said the King; "it may kiss my hand if it likes."
"I'd rather not," the Cat remarked.

"Don't be impertinent," said the King, "and don't look at me like that!" He got behind Alice as he spoke.
"A cat may look at a king," said Alice. "I've read that in some book, but I don't remember where."

【拓展】

爱丽丝所引用的这句话，源自当时英国的一句民间谚语："A cat may look at a king."（猫也可以看国王），其隐含的意义在于：即便是社会地位最为低微的人，也拥有审视、评判高位者的权利。这是一种在无法公开挑战既有制度时，弱者所能保有的、尤为珍贵的精神抵抗形式。

不过，爱丽丝却表示，这句话是自己曾在某本书中读到的——这一说法也并非全然虚构。早在三百多年前的1652年，确实曾有一本名为A Cat May Look Upon a King的著作出版，其内容正是对英国国王进行系统而尖锐的政治批判。

"Well, it must be removed," said the King very decidedly, and he called to the Queen, who was passing at the moment, "My dear! I wish you would have this cat removed!"
The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great or small. "Off with his head!" she said without even looking round.
"I'll fetch the executioner myself," said the King eagerly, and he hurried off.

Alice thought she might as well go back and see how the game was going on, as she heard the Queen's voice in the distance, screaming with passion. She had already heard her sentence three of the players to be executed for having missed their turns, and she did not like the look of things at all, as the game was in such confusion that she never knew whether it was her turn or not. So she went off in search of her hedgehog.

The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemed to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them with the other; the only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to the other side of the garden, where Alice could see it trying in a helpless sort of way to fly up into a tree.

By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fight was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight; "but it doesn't matter much," thought Alice, "as all the arches are gone from this side of the ground." So she tucked it away under her arm, that it might not escape again, and went back to have a little more conversation with her friend.

When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to find quite a large crowd collected round it; there was a dispute going on between the executioner, the King, and the Queen, who were all talking at once, while all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable.

The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle the question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as they all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactly what they said.

【文化卡片】

生词好句

1.play fairly
公平比赛

2.one's self
英 [wʌnˈself]	美 [wʌnˈself]
pron. 某人自己（oneself）

3.attend to
（本文）注意（pay attention to）；关怀、照料
拓展:
I can't stand it when people don't attend to the rules.
我最忍不了的就是有人不守规矩。

4.you have no idea how …
你根本想象不到……
拓展:
You've no idea how domineering he was.
你根本想象不到他控制欲有多强。
You've no idea how oppressive the atmosphere was.
你根本想象不到那儿的气氛有多压抑。

5.croquet
英 [ˈkrəʊkeɪ]	美 [kroʊˈkeɪ]
v. 贴击（槌球术语）

6.only
英 [ˈəʊnli]	美 [ˈoʊnli]
（本文）不料，反而，结果却（but）；只是
拓展:
I ran to the platform only to find I had missed the train.
我跑到站台，却发现原来车早就走了。

7.How do you like … ?
你觉得……怎么样？你喜欢……吗？
拓展:
How do you like your new job?
新工作怎么样？

8.worth while
英 [wɜːθˈwaɪl]	美 [wɜːrθˈwaɪl]
adj. 值得的（worthwhile）
拓展:
do a worthwhile job 做一份有意义的工作
give money to a worthwhile cause 为慈善事业贡献自己的一份力量
It's hardly worthwhile doing something.
为做某事费劲真不值得。
It's hardly worthwhile swatting a fly with a sledgehammer.
打苍蝇而已，用大锤砸真不值当的。（杀鸡焉用牛刀、没必要小题大做）

9.I don't like the look of …
我不喜欢……的样子（暗示不好的预感）
拓展:
I don't like the look of those clouds.
我不喜欢那些云的样子。（暗示要下雨）

10.impertinent
英 [ɪmˈpɜːtɪnənt]	美 [ɪmˈpɜːrtɪnənt]
adj. 无礼的

11.great or small
不论程度如何
拓展:
Kindness is a virtue in all acts, great or small.
不论行事大小，良善均为美德。

12.fetch
英 [fetʃ]	美 [fetʃ]
v. 叫来；请来
拓展:
fetch the doctor 请医生过来看看
fetch the kids from school 接孩子放学

13.executioner
英 [eksɪˈkjuːʃənə]	美 [eksɪˈkjuːʃənər]
n. 刽子手

14.miss one's turn
轮到自己却错过了
拓展:
They dared not leave for fear of missing their turns.
他们不敢离开，怕轮到自己的排号了人不在。

15.the look of things
目前的状况
拓展:
by / from the look of things 就目前情况来看
By the look of things, we are going to be very sorry if we don't get the hell out of here as soon as possible.
看这架势，咱要是不赶紧开跑，肯定会后悔莫及！

16.A is engaged in a fight with B
A正和B打架
拓展:
be engaged in... 从事某个行业或忙于某件事

17.… seem to somebody (to be) an excellent opportunity for doing something
在某人看来，这是做某事的绝佳时机
拓展:
This seems to me an excellent opportunity for taking a break.
在我看来，这正是好好休息的绝佳时机呀！

18.collect
英 [kəˈlekt]	美 [kəˈlekt]
v. 聚集；聚合；积累
拓展:
A crowd collected.
聚集起了一拨人。
Water collected on the ground.
地上积了一滩水。
Dust collected on the furniture.
家具上积了一层灰。

19.appeal to
请求或要求某人采取某种行动；呼吁
拓展:
The charity appealed to the public for donations.
慈善机构呼吁公众捐款。
I appealed to my boss for a pay rise.
我请求老板给我加薪。

20.argument
英 [ˈɑːɡjumənt]	美 [ˈɑːrɡjumənt]
n. 论点；理由
