The Mouse's Sad Tale

老鼠的悲伤故事

"You promised to tell me your history, you know," said Alice, "and why it is you hate-C and D," she added in a whisper, half afraid that it would be offended again.
“你答应过要给我讲你的经历，你知道的，”爱丽丝说，“还有你为什么讨厌猫和狗，”她小声补充道，有点害怕它又会生气。

"Mine is a long and a sad tale!" said the Mouse, turning to Alice, and sighing.
“我的故事又长又悲伤！”老鼠转向爱丽丝，叹着气说。

"It is a long tail, certainly," said Alice, looking down with wonder at the Mouse's tail; "but why do you call it sad?"
“尾巴确实很长，”爱丽丝惊奇地低头看着老鼠的尾巴说，“可是你为什么说它悲伤呢？”

"You are not attending!" said the Mouse to Alice, severely. "What are you thinking of?"
“你没有专心听！”老鼠严厉地对爱丽丝说，“你在想什么？”

"I beg your pardon," said Alice very humbly: "you had got to the fifth bend, I think?"
“请原谅，”爱丽丝很谦卑地说，“我想你已经讲到第五个弯了吧？”

"I shall do nothing of the sort," said the Mouse, getting up and walking away. "You insult me by talking such nonsense!"
“我才不会做那种事呢，”老鼠站起来走开时说，“你说这种胡话是在侮辱我！”

"Please come back and finish your story!" Alice called after it; and the others all joined in chorus, "Yes, please do!"
“请回来把你的故事讲完吧！”爱丽丝在后面喊道；其他人也齐声说：“是啊，请讲完吧！”

But the Mouse only shook its head impatiently, and walked a little quicker.
可是老鼠只是很不耐烦地摇摇头，走得更快了一点。

The others all seemed very sorry, but they could not help it. So they sat down again in a large ring, and begged the Mouse to come back.
其他人看起来都很遗憾，但也没有办法。于是他们又围成一个大圈坐下，请求老鼠回来。

In a little while, however, she again heard a little pattering of footsteps in the distance, and she looked up eagerly, half hoping that the Mouse had changed his mind and was coming back to finish his story.
不过，过了一小会儿，她又听见远处传来细小的脚步声，便急切地抬起头，半是希望老鼠改变了主意，回来把它的故事讲完。

【文化卡片】

生词好句

1.C and D

2.attend
英 [əˈtend] 美 [əˈtend]
词义辨析：attend vs. pay attention
Bill has not been attending in class.

6.always ready to make oneself useful

7.insult
英 [ˈɪnsʌlt] 美 [ˈɪnsʌlt]

8.crab
英 [kræb] 美 [kræb]
You're making the problem worse by crabbing about it!

9.lose one's temper

14.a remarkable sensation

15.pretext
英 [ˈpriːtekst] 美 [ˈpriːtekst]
He didn't attend the meeting on the pretext of having a fever.
